

===== PAGE 1 =====
RainFusion2.0: Temporal-Spatial Awareness and Hardware-Efficient Block-wise
Sparse Attention
Aiyue Chen∗1 Yaofu Liu∗1,2 Junjian Huang∗1
chenaiyue@huawei.com yliuls@connect.ust.hk huangjunjian3@huawei.com
Guang Lian∗1 Yiwu Yao∗1 Wangli Lan∗1
lianguang@huawei.com yiwuyao@pku.edu.cn lanwangli@huawei.com
Jing Lin∗1 Zhixin Ma∗1 Tingting Zhou∗1
linjing28@huawei.com mazhixin7@huawei.com zhoutingting13@huawei.com
Abstract forms.
In video and image generation tasks, Diffusion Transformer
(DiT) models incur extremely high computational costs due 1. Introduction
to attention mechanisms, which limits their practical appli-
Diffusion Transformer (DiT) models have exhibited out-
cations. Furthermore, with hardware advancements, a wide
standing performance in visual generation tasks. How-
range of devices besides graphics processing unit (GPU),
ever, their tremendously high computational cost limits the
such as application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), have
practical application of DiT models. Among these costs,
been increasingly adopted for model inference. Sparse at-
the major component stems from the Attention mecha-
tention, which leverages the inherent sparsity of attention
nism, whose computation scales exponentially with token
by skipping computations for insignificant tokens, is an ef-
length—ranging from 10K to 80K in current state-of-the-
fective approach to mitigate computational costs. How-
art DiT models. As research advances, it has been revealed
ever, existing sparse attention methods have two critical
that the Attention mechanism possesses inherent sparsity:
limitations: the overhead of sparse pattern prediction and
the softmax operation in Attention enables a minor subset
the lack of hardware generality, as most of these meth-
of tokens to exert a dominant impact on the final output.
ods are designed for GPU. To address these challenges,
Consequently, sparse Attention, which accelerates Atten-
this study proposes RainFusion2.0, which aims to develop
tion computation by only focusing on critical tokens, has
an online adaptive, hardware-efficient, and low-overhead
emerged as a prevalent optimization approach. Currently,
sparse attention mechanism to accelerate both video and
sparse Attention methods can be primarily categorized into
image generative models, with robust performance across
three types: (1) fixed patterns, (2) online adaptive masks,
diverse hardware platforms. Key technical insights in-
and (3) token permutations. Nevertheless, most of these ex-
clude: (1) leveraging block-wise mean values as represen-
istingmethodssufferfromcertainlimitations, whichrestrict
tative tokens for sparse mask prediction; (2) implementing
their widespread practical adoption.
spatiotemporal-aware token permutation; and (3) introduc-
Limitations: 1.TheDilemmaofbalancingAccuracyand
ing a first-frame sink mechanism specifically designed for
Efficiency. Twomainfactorscontributetothisdilemma: (1)
video generation scenarios. Experimental results demon-
sparsity degree; (2) the cost of predicting sparse patterns.
strate that RainFusion2.0 can achieve 80% sparsity while
For fixed patterns, the overhead of prediction is relatively
achieving an end-to-end speedup of 1.5 1.8× without com-
small. However, to achieve high accuracy, fixed-pattern
promising video quality. Moreover, RainFusion2.0 demon-
methods typically require a low sparsity degree, which
strates effectiveness across various generative models and
consequently compromises efficiency. On the other hand,
validates its generalization across diverse hardware plat-
online adaptive mask-based and token permutation-based
methods involve substantial overhead, primarily due to the
∗Allauthorscontributeequallytothisworkasthefirstauthors.
costs associated with predicting the sparse mask and the
†Correspondingauthor: HarryYang. E-mail: yangharry@ust.hk
1 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd 2The Hong Kong University of token permutation layout. 2.Lack of Device Universality.
ScienceandTechnology A major shortcoming of existing works is their neglect of
6202
rpA
02
]VC.sc[
2v68042.2152:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
universality across various devices. Most prediction meth- each block and uses these block means to derive attention
ods are specifically designed for Graphics Processing Units scores. It then selects the top-k blocks such that their cumu-
(GPUs) and are not universally applicable to other Artificial lative distribution function (CDF) meets a specific thresh-
Intelligence (AI) devices such as Application Specific In- old. Concurrently, it computes the cosine similarity be-
tegrated Circuit(ASIC). Specifically, the prediction process tween tokens within each block. Adaptive Sparse Attention
incurs unacceptably long time costs on AI devices other (AdaSpa)[4] observes that the sparse patterns for each layer
than GPUs. and head in DiT models remain stable throughout the dif-
Goal: We aim to design an online adaptive, hardware- fusion steps. Consequently, in the initial timesteps, it main-
efficient, and overhead-free sparse attention mechanism to tains full attention and online computes the optimal sparse
accelerate video and image generation models. pattern for each layer, which is then reused in subsequent
Key Idea: 1.Adaptive and Efficient Design. We partition steps.
tokens into different blocks and use the mean value of each (3) Token Permutations: This approach focuses on re-
block as the representative token for predicting the sparse arranging similar tokens to be adjacent, thereby enabling ef-
mask. 2.Spatiotemporal-aware permutation. To enhance fective sparsification. PAROAttention[8] primarily explores
the similarity within each block, we adopt a spatiotemporal- permuting video tokens across different dimensions, such
aware permutation strategy. Based on the inherent spatial as frame, height, and width, resulting in six possible order-
relationships of videos or images, tokens are divided into ings. Sparse Video Generation 2 (SVG2)[5] employs K-
three-dimensional (3D) or two-dimensional (2D) windows. means clustering to group similar tokens together. It then
Tokens within each window are arranged adjacently and uses the centroid of each cluster as its representative. Based
then flattened window by window. 3.First Frame Sink for on these centroids, SVG2 computes the attention scores
Video Generation. For video generation models, we fix the between clusters to determine which inter-cluster attention
attention computation relationship with the tokens of the computations can be strategically omitted.
first frame. This fixed pattern is termed ”First Frame Sink”.
4.Hardware Generality. Most importantly, our proposed 3. Method
method not only features low overhead but also achieves
3.1. Blockwise Sparse
generality across vary types of AI devices.
Flash attention is the backbone of the modern transformer
2. Related Work
model. RainFusion2 adopts flash attention into the sparse
mode. Consider the attention operation: given the query,
Sparse attention mechanisms have garnered significant re-
key, value matrices Q,K,V ∈ RN×d, we have S =
search interest within the domain of video and image gen- √
QK⊤/ d, P = Softmax(S), O = PV ,
erative diffusion models. This work categorizes these ad-
where the Softmax function is defined element-wise as
vancements into three primary paradigms:
Softmax(S) = exp(Sij) .
(1) Fixed Sparse Patterns: Sparse attention with fixed ij (cid:80)
k
exp(Sik)
patterns typically employs a predetermined set of sparse Flash attention: Divide Q into T q blocks {Q i } with
masks. The model selects one of these masks for use. block size b q , where Q i ∈ Rbq×d and T q = [N/b q ]. Divide
For instance, Sliding Tile Attention (STA)[7] precomputes K and V into T k blocks {K i } and {V i } respectively, with
a set of sliding window masks. Leveraging a small num- the same block size b k , where K i ∈ Rbk×d, V i ∈ Rbk×d
ber of prompts, STA matches an optimal pattern for each and T k = [N/b k ].
layer and each head within the Denoising Diffusion Trans- Subsequently, it use online softmax to compute each
former (DiT). During the generation of new videos, these block of the output O iteratively. The calculation of block
pre-matched masks are directly used. Similarly, Sparse O i proceeds as:
Video Generation (SVG)[3] designs two distinct pattern √
S = Q K⊤/ d, (1)
types: temporal and spatial masks. When computing atten- i,j i j
tion, SVG dynamically checks which mask is most suitable (m ,P˜ ) = f˜(m ,S ), (2)
i,j i,j i,j−1 i,j
for the current attention head. Rainfusion[1] extends this
l = exp(m − m )l + rowsum(P˜ ),
concept by introducing three mask types: temporal, spatial, i,j i,j−1 i,j i,j−1 i,j
(3)
and textural. Analogous to SVG, Rainfusion dynamically
assigns the most appropriate mask to each attention head. O i,j = diag(exp(m i,j−1 − m i,j ))O i,j−1 + P˜ i,j V j
(2) Online Adaptive Patterns: This category of sparse (4)
attention does not rely on fixed masks. Instead, tokens are
generally partitioned into blocks, and the model determines where m i,j ,l i,j ∈ Rbq×1, with initial values set to −∞ and
online which block tokens will participate in the attention 0 respectively. The operator f˜(·) is defined as follows: it
computation. SparseAttention [6] calculates the mean for computes m = max{m ,rowmax(S )} and P˜ =
i,j i,j−1 i,j i,j

===== PAGE 3 =====
Figure 1. Workflow of RainFusion2.0
exp(S − m ). Finally, the block O (the final output of where the matrix Sˆ has dimensions ⌈N/b ⌉ × ⌈N/b ⌉,
i,j i,j i q k
this incremental process) is obtained via: and {Sˆ } serves as an indicator to quantify the contribution
ij
of the block pair (Q ,K ) to the overall attention scores.
i j
O i = diag(l i,j )−1 O i,j Subsequently, we select the top-n important blocks {K j }
for each block {Q } based on the values of Sˆ .
i ij
To accelerate attention computation and improve hard-
ware utilization, we either skip or compute the full block-
(cid:40) (cid:110) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:111)
wise matrix multiplications of Q i K j ⊤ and P i,j V j . We 1, if j ∈ j | Sˆ ij ∈ TopN Sˆ,dim = 0 ,
M =
define a block-wise attention mask M with dimensions ij
0, otherwise,
⌈N/b ⌉ × ⌈N/b ⌉, where each element takes a value of ei-
q k (8)
ther 0 or 1. The sparse Flash Attention mechanism is then
However, a key challenge persists in this design: Despite
implemented as follows:
the high similarity between adjacent tokens, those within a
single block still show considerable variability. To mitigate
Q K⊤ and P V are skipped if M = 0.
i j i,j j ij this issue, some studies compute the cosine similarity of to-
kens inside blocks Q and K ; yet, this approach imposes
3.2. Representative Token for Blocks i j
considerable computational overhead. In contrast, we em-
To derive the block-wise attention mask M, if we calculate ploy window permutation techniques to enhance the simi-
thefullattentionscoresP asQ×K⊤, thisapproachactually larity of tokens within blocks Q and K .
i j
offers no sparsity-induced speedup. Thus, we select repre-
sentative tokens qˆ and kˆ for each block Q (query block) 3.3. 3D Window Permutation
i i i
and K i (key block), respectively. In video generation diffusion models, although tokens are
The core idea underlying the design of representative to- flattened into 1D sequences, they inherently encode 3D
kens originates from the observation that adjacent tokens physical spatiotemporal information. The length of the to-
in the Q,K matrix exhibit high similarity—a characteris- ken sequence is given by N = F ·W ·H, where F, H, and
tic that is consistent across different models and also across W denote the number of frames, spatial height, and spatial
distinct attention layers within a single model. width of the video in the latent space, respectively. The to-
The representative tokens qˆ i and kˆ j are defined as fol- kens typically exhibit similarity to adjacent tokens in both
lows: temporal and spatial dimensions.
The default token layout in diffusion models is
qˆ= {qˆ i } = mean(Q i ,axis = 0), (5) [F,H,W]. However, this order weakens the adjacent sim-
kˆ = {kˆ } = mean(K ,axis = 0), (6) ilarity in both the temporal and spatial dimensions. To-
j j
kens that are adjacent in 3D space are shuffled into different
Sˆ = {Sˆ } = {qˆ kˆ⊤} (7)
ij i j 1D positions. Consequently, the tokens within each block

===== PAGE 4 =====
are essentially non-adjacent in 3D space, thus undermining Image Generation Model: We additionally implemented
their self-similarity. experiments on the image generation model Qwen-image-
Permutation: To enhance the similarity of tokens within edit.
each block (i.e., Q and K ), we rearrange the tokens in a Evaluation Metrics: For video generation models,
i j
3D window-based order. The details will be released later. Vbench[2] was primarily adopted as the core evaluation
metric for video quality, which encompasses multiple crit-
3.4. First Frame Sink
ical dimensions including subjective consistency, imaging
Similar to the well-documented ”attention sink” phe- quality, and overall consistency. Furthermore, we intro-
nomenon in large language models (LLMs), where initial duced cosine similarity to characterize the overall differ-
tokens receive high levels of attention, an analogous phe- ences between videos generated by the full attention mech-
nomenon exists in video generation models with 3D full at- anism and those generated by RainFusion2.
tention. We refer to this analogous phenomenon in video Baseline: FullAttentionwasemployedasthefundamen-
generation as the First Frame Sink. tal baseline for comparison. We tested RainFusion2 with
Our observations across a range of video generation different sparsity levels (80% and 90%). Other sparse at-
models reveal that the first frame exerts a substantial influ- tention methods (e.g., SparseAttention and SVG2) exhibit
ence on the quality of the final generated video. Specifi- poor compatibility with NPUs, and thus were not included
cally, omitting the attention computation involving tokens in the efficiency comparison experiments.
corresponding to the first frame leads to a non-trivial degra- Perceptual Evaluation: While Vbench metrics can re-
dation in the quality of the generated video. Thus, tokens in flect the overall quality of videos and cosine similarity can
Q that represent the first frame are designed to attend to all characterize overall differences, these metrics struggle to
tokens in K, while all tokens in Q are enforced to attend to capture the fine-grained differences that are perceptible to
tokens in K that correspond to the first frame. the human eye. To address this limitation, we incorporated
In the Fig. 1, the first frame token is shown at the begin- perceptual evaluation to quantitatively assess the detailed
ning of the sequence. However, in practice, we move the differences between videos.
first frame token to the end of the sequence. This is because
4.2. Main result
some models combine video and text tokens as multimodal
input for attention computation. By grouping the first frame Video Generation Models: For Wan2.2 generating 720p
token with the text tokens, we can ensure they both partici- videos, we achieve a speedup of 1.57× to 1.8× with a spar-
pate in full attention. sity ratio of 80% to 90%, while maintaining nearly im-
perceptible quality loss (visually indistinguishable from the
4. Experiment full attention baseline). For HunyuanVideo1.5, configuring
a sparsity ratio of 80% to 90% also yields videos with al-
4.1. setup
most no visual quality degradation. Specifically, at 80%
Device: We evaluated our method on the Neural Process- sparsity, HunyuanVideo1.5 achieves a 1.16× speedup for
ing Unit (NPU), a type of Application-Specific Integrated 480p video generation and a 1.28× speedup under the 720p
Circuit (ASIC). As a typical and prevalent AI device dis- setting.
tinct from Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), NPUs have Image Generation Model: We also validated our method
been widely deployed for the inference of diffusion mod- on the Qwen Image Edit model. Even with a sparsity ratio
els. To highlight the hardware universality and efficiency of of 60%, the model maintains consistent quality in generated
our proposed method, we conducted comprehensive perfor- images (visually aligned with the full attention baseline).
mance evaluations on NPUs. Ablation Study: We conduct ablation experiments on the
Model: We validated the effectiveness of RainFusion2 3D window permutation. Although omitting permutation
by applying it to various generative models, covering both still performs well in quality metrics, and its cosine similar-
video and image generation tasks. ity is nearly identical to that of the videos generated with
Video Generation Models: Experiments were conducted full attention, visual inspection of the generated videos re-
on Wan2.2 and Hunyuanvideo1.5. For Wan2.2, we per- veals minor yet noticeable differences in temporal motion
formed tests on the 720P resolution. For Hunyuanvideo1.5, smoothness and frame details. For example, as shown in
evaluations were carried out on both 480P and 720P video Fig. 3, videos generated without 3D window permutation
resolutions. Notably, Hunyuanvideo1.5 inherently incorpo- are generally similar to those of full attention, but obvious
rates a sparse attention mechanism when generating 720P flaws appear in some local areas — these differences are
videos. We thus conducted comparative experiments be- hard to capture with common quality metrics. In contrast,
tween RainFusion2 and this native sparse attention mecha- adding 3D window permutation results in videos that are
nism in terms of both accuracy and performance. visually consistent with full attention, both in overall ap-

===== PAGE 5 =====
Table 1. RainFusion2 and Full Attention Comparison: Quality & Efficiency Metrics (Wan2.2 720p)
QualityMetrics EfficiencyMetrics
Method(sparsity)
Subj. Cons. ↑ ImagingQual. ↑ OverallCons. ↑ CosineSim. ↑ Latency(s) Speedup
FullAttention 0.9717 0.6816 0.2591 532
RainFusion(80%)(w/o3Dorder) 0.9690 0.6791 0.2555 0.9532 339 1.57x
RainFusion(90%)(w/o3Dorder) 0.9643 0.6709 0.2555 0.9476 295 1.80x
RainFusion(80%)(w/3Dorder) 0.9683 0.6864 0.2562 0.9514 339 1.57x
Qwen-image-
HunyuanVideo1.5 Wan2.2
edit
Full
RainFusion
Figure 2. Results of RainFusion on Diffusion Models. HunyuanVideo1.5 and Wan2.2 generate 720p videos under two configurations: full
attention and RainFusion with 80% sparsity. Qwen-image-edit generates 1024×1024 images using RainFusion with 60% sparsity.
(a) Full Attention (b) RainFusion 80% (w/o 3D permutation) (c) RainFusion 80% (w/ 3D permutation)
Figure 3. Experimental results on the Wan2.2 dataset. As shown in Subfigure (b), the video generated by RainFusion (80% sparsity,
without 3D permutation) is overall comparable to that of full attention (Subfigure (a)). However, two prominent spurious rock artifacts
emerge in the bottom-right corner of the video frame. In contrast, these visual artifacts are completely eliminated when 3D permutation is
integrated into RainFusion (Subfigure (c)).
pearance and fine-grained details. a practical and high-performance solution for accelerating
DiT models but also paves the way for their broader deploy-
ment on heterogeneous computing devices. Future work
5. Conclusion
will focus on exploring how to combine RainFusion2.0 with
other orthogonal acceleration methods, such as quantization
In conclusion, this study has addressed the critical chal-
and distillation.
lenges of high computational cost in DiT and limited hard-
ware generality in sparse attention by proposing RainFu-
sion2.0. Through the innovative integration of block-wise References
representativetokenprediction, spatiotemporal-awaretoken
[1] Aiyue Chen et al. Rainfusion: Adaptive video generation ac-
permutation, and a first-frame sink mechanism, RainFu-
celeration via multi-dimensional visual redundancy. In arXiv
sion2.0 achieves a remarkable balance between efficiency
preprint arXiv:2505.21036, 2025. 2
and performance. The experimental results demonstrate
that it can achieve 80% sparsity, leading to an end-to-end [2] Ziqi Huang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Fan Zhang, Chenyang
speedup of 1.5 1.8× across various video and image genera- Si, Yuming Jiang, Yuanhan Zhang, Tianxing Wu, Qingyang
tivemodels, allwhilemaintaininghighoutputquality. More Jin, Nattapol Chanpaisit, Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Limin
importantly, its hardware-efficient design allows RainFu- Wang, Dahua Lin, Yu Qiao, and Ziwei Liu. Vbench: Com-
sion2.0 to work across a wide range of platforms, effec- prehensive benchmark suite for video generative models. In
tively mitigating the hardware-specific limitations of exist- CVPR, pages 21807–21818, 2024. 4
ing sparse attention methods. This work not only provides [3] Haocheng Xi et al. Sparse videogen: Accelerating video

===== PAGE 6 =====
diffusion transformers with spatial-temporal sparsity. In
Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning,
2025. 2
[4] Yifei Xia, Suhan Ling, Fangcheng Fu, Yujie Wang, Huixia Li,
XuefengXiao, andBinCui. Training-freeandadaptivesparse
attentionforefficientlongvideogeneration. InProceedingsof
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 15982–15993, 2025. 2
[5] Shuo Yang, Haocheng Xi, Yilong Zhao, Muyang Li, Jin-
tao Zhang, Han Cai, Yujun Lin, Xiuyu Li, Chenfeng Xu,
Kelly Peng, Jianfei Chen, Song Han, Kurt Keutzer, and
Ion Stoica. Sparse videogen2: Accelerate video generation
with sparse attention via semantic-aware permutation. In
The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2025. 2
[6] Jintao Zhang, Chendong Xiang, Haofeng Huang, Jia wei,
Haocheng Xi, Jun Zhu, and Jianfei Chen. Spargeattention:
Accurate and training-free sparse attention accelerating any
model inference. In Forty-second International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2025. 2
[7] PeiyuanZhangetal. Fastvideogenerationwithslidingtileat-
tention. InForty-secondInternationalConferenceonMachine
Learning, 2025. 2
[8] Tianchen Zhao, Ke Hong, Xinhao Yang, Xuefeng Xiao,
Huixia Li, Feng Ling, Ruiqi Xie, SiQi Chen, Hongyu Zhu,
Zhang Yichong, and Yu Wang. PAROAttention: Pattern-
aware reordering for efficient sparse and quantized attention
in visual generation models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
2